Welcome to the debugging
session for LLDB.
Looks like we have a good crowd.
I'm Greg Clayton,
one of the architects of LLDB.
Now, before we get started with a lot of
the great content that we have today,
I just want to kind of take a look at
what's happened over the past year,
because it's been a big
year for LLDB itself.
Last year at WWDC,
we introduced an Xcode seed that
had LLDB as an available debugger,
so it's just one of your choices.
Later on in the year, in December,
we released Xcode 4.3,
in which LLDB became
the default debugger.
And this year, we've got a great seed for
you guys with Xcode 4.5.
And LLDB, again, is the default debugger,
but we've made a lot of
improvements for you guys.
So just to highlight some of the things
that you can watch for is we've got
much improved Objective-C debugging
support for you guys.
We've got property syntax built into
the expression parser so that you
can actually use your backed and your
unbacked properties in your expressions.
And we also will find the one true
definition of your class so that when
you're debugging and if you happen
to use the nameless category where
you hide some instance variables in
your main definition of your class,
we'll actually try and dig
up that definition as much
as possible while debugging.
We've done some great stuff with
some of the new data formatters.
We've got some data formatters
that are actually built into
the core of LLDB itself.
Now, that helps us display
your Objective-C types,
like your NSStrings and your NSArrays and
other Objective-C collection classes,
as well as your C++,
standard template library, collections,
and data types.
One of the other great things that we've
done with the Objective-C data formatters
is we've actually made them so 80% of
the time where we actually used to have
to run code to show you your data types,
we don't actually have to run code.
What that means for you is your data
will be available more of the time,
your summaries and the
contents of your arrays.
We now added Watchpoint support
for desktop and for iOS.
And we've got an improved
Python interface where we've exposed
much more of the API that's built into
the debugger itself so you can get access
to it through some Python scripting.
And we'll talk about
that as the talk goes on.
Today we're going to go
through a couple things.
We're going to introduce you into
LLDB and talk about the hows and
the whys and why we decided to write
the debugger in the first place.
And we'll move on to getting more
in-depth with LLDB and going through
some of the command interpreter,
going through some of the
terminology that's involved,
and then go through a debug session
where we'll stop along the way
and take a look at how LLDB can
help us out when we're debugging.
And then we'll use LLDB to do
a couple of different things
that are not debugging-related,
but there's a lot of great features
inside of a debugger that you
should be able to take advantage of,
and we'll go through
a few examples there.
And then we'll wrap things up.
So let's get started.
Well, before we get into LLDB,
we want to talk a little bit
about why we decided to create
LLDB in the first place.
And what it came down to is
we really wanted a better
debugger to give to you guys.
Now, you might ask,
what was wrong with our
existing technology?
We kind of took a look at where we wanted
to be over the next couple of years,
and we thought about the things that
we want to do with multi-threaded
debugging and a lot of different things
that we wanted to add support for.
And we just came up with the fact that
the architecture inside of GDB wasn't
correct for where we wanted to be.
Now, one of the issues that we had
was how debug information was
parsed as you're debugging.
And GDB parses information
in large chunks.
And the best analogy I can offer
is if debug information is a book,
GDB likes to ingest debug
information a chapter at a time.
And we thought we could do better.
Also, there was never an API.
There was never an API that
was vended from GDB itself.
And we have a lot of tools where
people will actually launch
GDB from the command line,
feed text into it,
and get text back out in order to
use it as if it did have an API.
Now,
another issue that we had was a lot of
information inside the debugger itself
was contained in global variables that
were kind of strewn across the code.
And that made it really
difficult for us to,
say, put all those things together
inside of one structure that would
represent maybe your debugging target
or your process or your threads.
[Transcript missing]
With the expression parser,
one of the things that
happens is as time goes on,
the compiler adds new features.
It adds new languages,
new runtime support,
and the expression parsers
tend to lag behind.
And you're always playing catch-up with
the debugger when you're not actually,
when you have an expression parser that
is just built into the debugger itself.
And it made it hard for us to add even
simple things like Objective-C property
support into the expression parser.
There's a lot of languages that
are supported inside of the
expression parser because GDB's
been around for quite a few years.
And again, adding something as simple as
Objective-C property support proved to
be a lot harder than it should have been.
So we wanted to go design a new debugger,
and we wanted to keep a lot
of different things in mind.
Now, of course,
we wanted something that performed
great and did well on memory.
But really,
we wanted to be able to customize our
debug sessions so that you guys can see
your data exactly how you want to see it.
So we wanted to do a lot
of things that are really,
really easy to do while debugging.
We also wanted to integrate with a
compiler because the compiler guys,
we'd much rather have the LLVM and Clang
folk do the great work that they're doing
and take advantage of what they're doing.
And then we also wanted to
modernize our architecture.
So we're going to concentrate
on a few things here today,
and we're just going to talk
about the customization,
the compiler integration,
and the architecture itself.
So one of the great things that
you can do with LLDB that we added
for this year was we added a lot
of ways to display your data.
You can override the formats for given
types so that you don't always have to
right-click and set the format manually.
You can create summaries
for your data types,
much like you could in Xcode,
but we actually built this into the
core of LLDB itself so that the command
line users aren't left out in the cold.
And also,
synthetic instance variables allows
us to take opaque collection classes,
like, say, an NSArray or a standard
template library vector,
and actually create a new set of
objects that appear underneath the
data type so that you can view your
data the way that you want to see it.
We have a lot of great ways for you guys
to customize your command interface.
If you're a GDB user and we forgot
one of your favorite commands,
you can easily add aliases.
If you're coming from a different
debugger and you're used to
typing in certain commands,
we wanted to make sure that
it was very customizable.
We also have a lot of different
ways for you to customize
the prompts that show up.
And the prompts appear when
you display your threads or
when you display your frames.
And we've got great ways to
customize all those things.
Now, when integrating with a compiler,
I just want to ask the question,
why do we actually want to
integrate with the compiler itself?
And to answer that,
we should look at what
debuggers typically do.
Typically, a debugger will make up its
own homegrown type system.
And the debug information is actually
parsed into this internal representation.
On top of that,
an expression parser is built that
actually uses these internal types.
Now, the type system that the debuggers
make up is not the same type
system that the compiler would use.
So there's often
shortcuts that are taken,
and there's often different, you know,
issues that arise as you're
adding support for new
languages when you have these,
you know, homegrown data structures.
And the expression parsers are
always striving for a compiler level
of accuracy to make up for this,
and they never quite attain that.
So the expression parsers we
talked about needs to be updated.
As the compilers get updated and added,
they're going to be updated.
So we're going to have
to write new features.
And how hard can it be to write
a good C++ expression parser?
So we prefer to let the
compiler guys do their job,
and we just took a full copy of Clang
and built it right into LDB itself.
Now that gives us-- allows us to take
the debug information and actually
just translate it into the actual data
types that the compiler would use,
just as if it were compiling your code.
So now we didn't make
up our own type system,
but we have a type system that
fully represents all the detail
that's contained in your code.
And it allows us to just use the
compiler as our expression parser.
Now we attain what all the other
debuggers are striving for,
trying to attain compiler level of
accuracy when evaluating expressions.
We also get the complete language
support full of every single feature
that's built into the compiler itself.
We get the same errors that
you're used to from the command
line and from within Xcode.
And we get the compiler
features for free.
Most notably recently,
we've added Objective-C literal
support and C++11,
including Lambda support.
So we're able to take advantage of this
really quickly because we just used
the code that is the compiler itself.
So if we talk about architecture,
one of the things we wanted to start
over with and make sure that we
had a clean object-oriented design,
that enables us to encapsulate
the different objects that make
up your debug session into,
say, a process or into a thread object.
And we don't run into the same
issues that we ran into where
we had globals that were trying
to maintain some program state.
And by encapsulating it,
it allows us to do a lot better job
of running multiple architectures
within the same debugger,
having multiple debug sessions going
on inside the same debugger as well.
We have a plugin interface that
allows us to quickly adapt to new file
formats and debug information formats,
and there's a whole bunch of other
plugins that are actually built
into the debugger itself that cover
languages and runtimes and a lot
of different features that make
LLDB able to adapt to the changing
languages and the changing future of
the code that you'll be dealing with.
And we wanted to design a debugger that
meets today's debugging requirements.
The biggest issue that
we are running into now,
as you well know,
we have more and more threads
in our debug sessions.
So we wanted to make sure in these
objects that we've made to represent
your debug sessions that we do a
great job at multi-threaded debugging.
We also stay in sync with the compiler,
so we're never lagging
behind and playing catch-up.
LLDB is a framework,
and that allows us to
actually vend an API.
That means that people can take advantage
of some of the great features that
are built into the debugger itself.
It also allows us to make this
entire API available to you through
a Python scripting interface.
Now, this is available both internally
inside of LLDB from the embedded
script interpreter and also externally,
so that you can load up Python and
actually script a debug session.
So that was a quick introduction
into why we decided to write LLDB.
Let's get a little more in-depth
into LLDB and discover some things.
So we're going to get started
and introduce you to some
of the LLDB commands first.
And in that section,
we'll learn about some of the
terminology that's involved and
some of the objects that are the
key players inside of the debugger.
And we'll move on to showing you how you
can customize your commands in case we
have forgotten a shortcut that you need.
We'll talk about some of the things
that go into launching your program,
and then we'll get into a debug
session where we'll explore and
we'll stop along the way and use
some of the features of LLDB.
So if we get started here,
let's start by running
LLDB from the command line.
The XCRUN command allows us to run
a binary that's contained inside
the Xcode application bundle,
and it will also load the correct
application depending on which
Xcode you may have selected.
So here we launch LLDB.
We create a debug session
using the file command.
Set a breakpoint at main.
Let's go ahead and run.
Do some backtraces and some stepping.
Display some data.
Do a little bit more stepping,
and then quit.
Now, if anyone's used GDB before
from the command line,
you're probably going to
recognize a lot of these commands.
And they're actually aliases into the
actual LLDB commands that back them.
We wanted to make sure that the
people that had been debugging for
a long time felt right at home.
When running LLDB from the command line,
as well as from within the
debugger console in Xcode.
Now, that's not how these commands
are actually represented
inside of LLDB itself.
If we take a look at these
same commands in LLDB,
we would tell a target that we would
like to create a new debug session
using the executable ADAT out.
Then we would set a breakpoint,
and we would specify an option that
we're setting a breakpoint by name.
We would tell the process to launch,
and we would tell the thread
to backtrace and step.
We'd run an expression,
and do a little bit more stepping,
and quit.
Now, with the command interpreter,
we wanted to fix a couple of
things that we ran into with GDB.
With GDB, we had a very inconsistent
command syntax.
From command to command,
you really didn't know what to expect.
Some commands were single characters.
Some commands were multiple characters.
Some commands were multi-word commands.
Others had options, long options,
short options.
There was a different parser
for every different command.
And there was a lot of different hidden
shortcuts inside of these commands.
And that's one of the
things we wanted to avoid.
There was a lot of argument overloading
that went on inside of commands.
For example, GB's breakpoint command
could take a file colon line,
it could take the name of a function,
it could take an address,
but only if you put a
star in front of it.
And there's a lot of different
things that might not make sense
to users that are coming at
it with a fresh pair of eyes.
With LLDB's command interpreter,
we wanted to make sure that we had
a very consistent command syntax,
so no matter what command you typed,
you knew exactly what to expect.
We use options instead of
overloading the arguments.
And that helps us target
the auto-completion a
little more efficiently.
Instead of -- with the break command,
if you hit tab after typing
the break command in GDB,
we'd have to auto-complete
every file and line,
every function and a whole
lot of different things.
And by using options,
we can actually show you the
data that you're actually looking
for a lot more efficiently.
We also wanted to make
commands more discoverable.
And in the upcoming terminology slides,
we'll see how we can discover
what different commands can do.
Greg Clayton And the documentation
for the commands is actually built
right into the debugger itself.
So if we take a look at
the command syntax in LLDB,
we tend to stick to a noun-verb paradigm.
Target create, break point set,
process launch.
And after that, we add on the standard
Unix style options.
And then we add on our
arguments that come after this.
We use the same command interpreter
to parse all of your expressions --
or to parse all of your commands.
You're going to know exactly
what to expect when you come in.
We actually also use a very common
Unix library to parse up our options
so that you can actually intermingle
your arguments and your options.
If you take a look at the first command,
we can actually put one
of the arguments first.
So if you're used to debugging
from -- or if you're used to
running commands from the shell,
you'll be right at home when
running commands in LLDB.
Now, the other thing that we could do
in GDB is you could shorten down
your commands by only typing in the
fewest number of characters that
you had to in order to uniquely
identify the command itself.
We've implemented that as well.
And for every long Unix
style option that we have,
we have a short Unix style counterpart.
So you'll know exactly what to
expect when typing in commands.
So we've learned about some
of the commands and we've seen
some terminologies so far,
but I want to introduce you to some
of the key components that you'll
be using when debugging in LLDB.
To get started, a target.
A target is something that
represents your debug session.
It contains your breakpoints and
it contains all the information
that persists between runs.
Now, file A.out is an alias
to target create A.out.
That allows us to create a new
target that we want to debug.
If we want to discover the various things
that we can actually do with the target,
you can type target followed
by space and hit the tab key,
and we'll actually autocomplete
all the various things that you
can actually do with the target.
You can see that there's a lot of
different things that you can do.
You can create, you can delete,
you can list, and you can see the
modules inside of a target.
To drive home the fact that
a target actually represents
a standalone debug session,
let's go ahead and create a target
using a very simple executable,
set a breakpoint inside of it,
and run that target.
Now, what happens when we create another
target and set a breakpoint at
a different function and run it?
Well,
we actually have two simultaneous debug
sessions going on at the same time.
This will allow you to debug your
client and server applications
inside the same binary.
Using the target list command,
you can see a list of the current
targets that you actually have running.
They maintain their own state.
They know if they're running or stopped.
They have their own breakpoints.
You can switch between the different
targets using the target select command,
and you can switch back.
Another benefit of actually
running two debug sessions in the
same binary is memory footprint.
If we take a look at debugging
these two programs in,
say, GDB,
each of these boxes would represent a
chunk of memory that would be taken up.
By debugging two of the applications
in the same binary itself,
we can actually share the resources in
between the different debugging targets.
Now, this will come in handy if you have
large applications or a large client
and server where you're sharing a
lot of infrastructure underneath
that has a lot of debug information.
Thank you.
If we get back to terminology,
let's talk about a process.
When you type the run command
followed by some arguments,
it's actually equivalent to
typing process launch and
specifying some arguments.
Now, you might notice the dash
dash that appears here.
And the dash dash is actually
something that terminates the options
to the process launch command itself.
Because some of the arguments that you
might want to pass on to your program
might look like options themselves
and might get confused with options
and cause the process launch to get
some arguments it wasn't expecting.
So if we take a look at what
we can do with a process,
we can type process and hit the
tab key again to discover all
the variety of different things
that we can do with a process.
We'll show you some of the more
common things that you'll do.
If you want to attach to
a process by process ID,
you can use the process attach
with the dash dash PID option.
You can attach to a process by name.
You can create a target first.
And if you create a target,
we already know the name
of the executable that
you're going to attach to.
So you can just type process attach.
As well, you might not have control over
how your program gets launched.
And one of the features that
we added was the process attach
with the wait for option.
Basically, it'll wait around and pull the
operating system and watch for the next
instance of your program to be run.
Now, there's an inherent race condition
in this where you might miss the
first couple thousand instructions,
and I used an XPC service here
to kind of drive that point home.
Because XPC services kind
of launch very quickly,
they kind of run through the code,
and they kind of either
exit or kind of go idle.
So if you're looking to
attach to an XPC service,
you might need to put a few delays
inside of your code to make sure that
you can catch your breakpoints and
make sure that we don't attach to your
process after your code has gone by.
To continue your process after this,
you can type process continue.
We have aliases for the GDB users,
continue and C.
And to interrupt your process,
you can type control C.
If we move on into thread,
we can type thread.
Again, hit tab and discover all the
variety of different things that
we can do with thread itself.
Some of the more popular things
that you'll use is thread list
to list all the threads that are
currently in your current process.
Also, thread select allows you to
select a thread using the index,
the unique index that's been given
to your thread as they are created.
If you want to do a backtrace,
you can type thread backtrace,
or we do have shortcuts
for the GDB users,
which is BT, stands for backtrace.
To backtrace all of your threads,
you can type bt all.
Now, if we move on to the frame,
same thing.
We can discover the variety
of different things that we
can do with the frame itself.
Basically, frame select is how you switch
between the different frames.
We've got a shortcut to keep
up with the GDB commands.
We can also go up or down to select the
frame that appears above or below us.
And one of the important
things that's different from
GDB is how you get variables,
your locals and your arguments.
You ask the frame to
show you its variables.
This command is equivalent to both the
info locals and the info args commands
from GDB kind of built into one command.
The last thing I wanted to talk
about in terminology is modules.
When you create a debug session,
you might have your main executable
and you might have one or more shared
libraries that goes along with that.
When you type target modules list,
you can see a list of all the
shared libraries that are currently
involved in your debug session.
This is equivalent to the
GDB's info shared command.
There's a lot of different things that
you can do with the target modules list.
With the seed,
you can actually specify an exact file
if you're only interested in seeing the
details on one of your shared libraries,
and you can specify that file
by the base name or by the
full shared library path name.
You can also dump the symbol
tables or the sections,
but the ones that you guys will
probably find yourself using is
the target modules lookup command.
It says, look up something by address.
Show me what file and line
and function this comes from.
Also, to look up a type,
you can type target modules lookup with
the type option and specify a type name.
So that kind of wraps up the terminology.
If you need help on any of the
commands that you discover,
you can type help followed
by the command name,
and we'll output a man-page
style section of help.
Now, if we scroll down,
we can see that we actually
have an option down here
that's the format option.
And the format says that it
takes a format option type.
You can also get help on option types
as well by typing help followed by the
text that you see in the option values.
And here we can see that when
you're specifying a format,
you can specify a whole bunch of
different things so you can see
the data exactly how you want to.
If you don't know what
you're looking for,
but you know it has something
to do with the thread,
you can use the apropos command.
Apropos takes one or more keywords.
Again, it's very similar to GDB.
And it'll dump out a list
of the different commands
that you can actually use.
You can go type help on those commands
to see further what you can do with each
command after reading the descriptions.
So that wraps up the terminology.
Let's look at how we can actually
customize the commands themselves.
We've got three different
ways to customize commands.
We've got some simple aliases.
We've got regular expression commands.
And we also have a way to
make user-defined commands,
in case we have missed a command that
you missed in a previous debugger.
With simple aliases, it's very simple.
We use the command alias command.
You specify an alias name,
and you specify one or more things that
you'd like us to type in its place.
Here, we're going to remake the
aliases for the up and down,
which selects the next and previous
frame by creating quick aliases to them.
We can also use positional
argument inclusion.
Here, we're going to make an alias for
being able to disassemble a range.
And we'll make it, you know,
insert the arguments exactly
where we want them to go.
Any arguments that we want to make,
we can make them in the same way.
Any arguments that aren't specified
on the command line or aren't
positionally included will be
appended onto the end of your alias.
And we'll also make sure that
we're not using any of the
same alias for the up and down,
which selects the next and previous
frame by creating quick aliases to them.
We're going to create an alias called F,
which is going to do a variety
of different things for us.
First off, we're going to specify
a regular expression,
and if the arguments match
just a number on a line,
we're going to actually substitute
it into the frame select command.
If it matches plus or minus
followed by a number on the line,
we'll substitute it into the frame
select inside the relative option.
And then anything else,
we'll just pass on to the
frame variable command.
So we've just implemented
the argument overloading that
we're used to from within GDL.
I see there's some people that
know what a regular expression is.
So now if we move on to
user-defined commands,
we have Python built in.
Make the command with Python.
So all you have to do is
create a Python module,
which is just a fancy word for a
Python file that creates a function
with the following prototype.
Then we can actually import the module
into LLDB itself and bind it up.
And to show this,
let's go through a quick example.
Let's say I cannot live without being
able to list files inside of LLDB itself.
The ls command,
for those that might not know,
is a command you run from the
terminal that lists files for you.
And we're going to take a look
at the file that it takes to
implement this command in Python.
First, we mention Python.
Then we import the LLDB module so
that we can actually use some of the
debugger objects that are passed into us.
Then we import a Python module that
allows us to run a shell script or a
shell command and get the textual output.
And then we create our function.
We quickly create a string
that we want to go execute.
We run it out in the shell
and get the result back.
And we can put the result right into
the result object that was passed in.
That simple.
Now we run LLDB from the command line.
We type command script import and
specify a path to our Python file.
And now we need to bind up a new
command to the actual function
inside of that file itself.
To do that,
we use the command script add command.
Now we specify that we want to
bind it to a Python function.
And we have to give it
the Python module name,
which is the same as the name
of the file that you used.
And we also bind it to a
function inside of that module.
So inside of one Python module,
you can have multiple commands
that you can actually bind up.
And then all we do is give it a quick
command name that we want to use.
In this case, we'll use LS.
And from here on out,
when you're in the debugger,
if you type the LS command,
you can see that you've actually
just added shell scripting.
And then you can see that you've actually
just added shell script-- you know,
shell support into your debugger.
So this is a very simple example.
And I just wanted to show something quick
so we could see how easy it is to just
get the command interpreter to come in
and call your Python function itself.
But we actually have a lot of different
objects that are built into Python.
The debugger has access to
all of your current targets.
Each of your targets has
access to the process.
Your process has access to the
objects that back your threads.
Your threads have access to your frames,
and your frames have
access to your variables.
You have access to everything that's
contained inside the debugger.
So there's a lot of different uses that
you can do to make commands where you
can introspect your current process.
There's global objects that actually
represent the current process
and the current frame and the
current thread that are selected
inside the command interpreter.
And we've got a web page for
you up at ldb.lvm.org in the
Python reference section down here.
Highly recommend going
and checking this out.
It'll explain all of the various
variables that are predefined for you.
It'll explain how to get help.
We have a command template that is
kind of a hollowed out version of
one of these commands that we've
just shown you that has a few
more bells and whistles built in.
So there's a lot of great
resources up on the website.
Now,
we've learned about a lot of commands,
and you might want to put some
of these commands into your
debug session every time you run.
For that, just like GDB,
GDB has an initialization
file called .gdbnit.
We made a .ldbnit file as well.
Now, this is a great place to add any
commands that you want to run
just after LLDB gets launched.
And, of course,
there's a lot of different
things that you can do that
you can put into these files,
and we'll leave that to you
guys to decide what there is,
but we're going to talk about some type
formatting commands a little later on.
This would be a great place
for you guys to put those.
Now,
there's a little bit more information
that we need to go through about what
initialization files we'll actually load.
First and foremost,
when we launch an application,
we'll look for an application-specific
version of your LLDB.nit file.
In this case, if we're running Xcode,
we'll look for a .ldbnit-xcode.
If that file's there,
we'll actually source that file,
and if it's not there,
we'll actually just look
for the .ldbnit file itself,
and then your debug session will start.
With the command line,
we go one step further.
If we first change directory
into the temporary directory,
we go create a new debug session.
What kind of files get loaded?
Well, first,
we look for the application-specific
version of the initialization file,
our LLDB.nit-ldb.
If that file does not exist,
we back up and just load
the LLDB.nit file itself,
we then load the program that you
specified on the command line,
and then we actually also
look in the current working
directory for an LLDB.nit file.
This allows you to place an LLDB.nit
file in your current working directory,
wherever you're debugging from,
and it allows you to have a place
where you can actually set breakpoints
or set up your debug session so
that you don't have to type in all
the commands every time you run.
So we're going to go through
just a few things about launching
programs because there's a few
things that you might not know.
When we launch programs with arguments,
we can actually specify those
arguments on the command line itself.
Here we use XCRUN to run LLDB.
We're going to launch a
program called PrintArgs.
Its sole job is to print out
the arguments that were passed
to the program and then quit.
So in LLDB, if we type run,
we can see that we didn't
specify any arguments,
but remembered the actual arguments
that you specified on the command line.
If you rerun again,
we'll run with those same arguments.
But if you specify different arguments,
you can notice that we'll
actually update the arguments.
And the next time you run,
we'll remember the last set
of arguments that you used.
Setting environment variables.
There's a right way and a wrong way,
depending on what kind of
environment variable you're setting.
A common thing to do is to
go to your shell and set the
environment variable there.
Then we go ahead and run the debugger.
We launch the process,
and we can interrupt it and see that
the actual environment variable got set.
But that's a good idea only if
the environment variable only
affects your current program.
The malloc stack logging,
as some of you might know,
enables a very expensive system-wide
feature that tracks every allocation
and every free and makes a stack
backtrace to it inside of this file.
So it's a pretty
expensive thing to enable.
And by setting this environment
variable in our shell,
we've just actually run LLDB and
XCRUN with that functionality enabled.
So the way around this is to not set
the environment variable in your shell,
but just use the process launch
command with the dash dash.
We can use the short style option and
specify it more than once if we want to
set more than one environment variable.
But this is a great way to ensure
that the environment variables
that you set only get set for the
program that you want to debug.
Another great feature if we've got
anyone that's doing command line
debugging is we have the ability to
launch your program in a standalone
terminal with the --tty option.
That'll pop open a brand-new window where
your debugger is still in one window
and your debug session's in another
and allow you to debug your program.
Now, if you debug VI or Emacs or anything
else that actually mucks with the
terminal settings by playing with
the echo settings and a lot of other,
you know, complex things,
this feature will be for you.
So let's get into a debug session now
where we'll kind of stop along the way
and see where LLDB can help us out.
And in this debug session,
we're going to use a very simple class.
Here we have a pointer array class
that's got two instance variables.
It's got a pointer to some pointers,
and it also has a size.
Now, if we start our debug
session in Xcode and run,
we note that we get an assertion.
And if we take a look at our code here,
we can see that we actually checked
if our value of pointers was nil,
and it was nil.
And so we assume that
the size would be zero,
but it isn't, and that's why we had the
assertion in our code.
If we take a look at the
bottom of the screen,
we see that size is
this very large number.
Now, this might be a random number we
might have gotten scribbled on
by some other thing on the stack.
We might have had some other issues.
But let's take a look
at this value in hex.
So if we right-click
on the variable itself,
we can actually set the value to hex.
But this might not be what we want to do,
because the size you're
going to get is nil.
So we normally going to want to
see that as a decimal number.
So another way that you can
actually implement this is go
over into the command line and
use the frame variable command.
With frame variable,
you're asking the frame to
show you one of its variables.
We can specify an alternate format
so that we don't override the
format permanently on that variable.
And then we can specify a path.
And we can see that our
variable contains all Fs.
Now, for me,
that's a sign that I took zero
and I probably decremented
it one too many times.
So if we run our debug session again
and stop before things go wrong,
we take a look at our
variables and we say,
"Wait a minute.
I've got some uint pointer Ts,
which are actually pointers,
and we're actually seeing
them as decimal." Now,
one fix for this would be to every
time you stopped in your code
when you're debugging an Xcode,
right-click on the
variable and set it to hex.
Next time you run and
stop somewhere else,
right-click again, set it to hex.
You can be right-clicking all day,
or you can actually use one of the
new features inside of LDB where
we can actually override the format
permanently for a given type.
For that,
we use the type format add command.
We specify a format, and in this case,
hex, and we can give it one or more
type names to apply it to.
Now, any time we see a uint pointer T,
an int pointer T, or an off T,
we can actually view those as hex,
both from the command line
itself and also back in the UI.
Now, if we run again and we stop before
we actually try and find our problem,
we can see our pointer array
down here in the variable view,
and it's not expanded by default.
So again, everywhere that you're
going to run and stop,
you're going to see that your pointer
array is not going to be expanded.
You're going to have to go expand
it just to see what's inside of it.
And if we expand it and
take a look inside of it,
we can see that it actually
doesn't contain that much stuff.
It wouldn't be that hard to
create a summary for this.
So we can in LLDB,
using the type summary add command,
we can specify a summary string
that actually refers to the
variable itself and to instance
variables inside the variable,
as well as including some plain text,
and then we can apply it to a type.
Now, if we view that variable,
we can see that we actually see a
quick summary both in the command
line and up in Xcode itself.
Now, the summary string syntax
can contain plain text.
It can contain references
to your variables.
And you can optionally override
the format in which that is
used to display your variable.
So variable path references are
contained inside of a dollar
sign and a squiggly bracket,
just to make it unique so that
you can type in plain text.
You can optionally specify a
path down inside that variable,
and you can also override the format.
The formats are the same formats
that we looked at at the beginning
when we typed help and we got
help on the option type of format.
And it just helps to see
some example strings.
Here's a quick string.
We've got stuff color coded
so you can see what's what.
Where we specify some plain text,
natural is equal to the variable.
And we would insert the
value of the variable in its
natural format right there.
Octal is equal to the variable,
and then we actually want to override
the format for this and show it as octal.
So we can quickly see that there's
a lot of different ways to customize
your debug session for your types,
show a nice little succinct
summary both in the command
line and up in Xcode itself.
So if we take a look back at our code,
we can see that we've got a lot
of different ways to customize
your debug session for your types.
So if we take a look back at our code,
once we've run and we've done this,
we can see that we've got
a nice little summary.
We can keep an eye on this summary
as we step along and watch for
our size to kind of go to that,
you know, incorrect value.
And we see that as soon
as we step over line 120,
we've caused our problem to show up,
our size is this invalid value,
and we should step into the
function call at line 120.
So we've got a page up on the website,
again, that talks about variable
formatting down on the left.
There's a whole bunch of stuff
that we haven't gotten to today,
just didn't have time.
We've got ways for you guys to run
Python functions that can actually
create a new summary string for you.
So you can use flow control to discover
what kind of type you might want to show.
You might want to look
at your variable and say,
if size is greater than, you know,
a million, then print error.
So you can actually use, you know,
flow control when you're doing this.
So the other way that we could have
solved this problem is actually
with the expression parser.
And we talked about compiler
integration at the start of the talk.
And really,
that's one of the best things about,
you know, LLDB itself.
So it's worth taking a step back and
looking at the different things that
we can do with an expression parser.
So for one,
if we run and we stop here in our code,
and if we're going to
write an expression,
think of it as if we actually
made a little space right before
where your program counter
is and inserted a new scope.
And any expression that you type there
actually appears inside of that scope.
And that'll become evident in a second.
For people that might not
know what an expression is,
it's a statement that you type that gets
evaluated as if it were in your code.
The result gets displayed and actually
gets saved into a convenience store.
So if you want to do that,
you can do that with a
lot of different things.
You can do arithmetic.
You can say X plus Y.
You can make function calls.
You can do casting.
And with LLDB, you can do much,
much more.
So if we get back to our code,
we can do a simple expression like
this where we just check for the
equality of an item inside of our array.
But we have a compiler
as our expression parser.
We're not limited to single statements.
We can do multiple statements.
We can actually declare
expression local variables.
Here we declare a typed expression
local variable whose lifetime is
good for only the expression itself.
We made uint pointer ti equals 12.
And then we used that variable
and added it to something that
was actually in our program.
We can actually create expression
global variables that are typed.
Here we declare a variable,
and if you put a dollar sign at
the beginning of the variable name,
it will persist for longer than
just the current expression.
And it's something that
you got to type yourself.
It's not the result of
expression that you had to cast.
You get to explicitly
tell us what type it is.
Now, we can use that expression
global variable,
and we can also use flow control.
You can use an if statement.
So...
Now,
one of the things that you might want
to do when evaluating your expression is
stop while evaluating your expression.
Here,
if we run the expression command and we
use one of these fancy options that says
unwind on error and we set that to zero,
what is that going to do?
Well,
usually if you run an expression and
you cause an exception to occur or
if you dereference bad memory or you
do a lot of other different things,
we'll stop your expression,
we'll wipe it away from your program
as if it never happened and just
go on with what you were executing.
But you might actually want
to stop while you're actually
inside of this expression to go,
wait a minute,
why did this expression not work?
So if you use the unwind on
error and we set that to zero,
that'll allow us to stop at breakpoints.
You can stop when you hit an
exception to figure out why
your expression didn't work.
You can do a lot of different things.
Now, to reproduce our problem,
we just had to call the pop function
a bunch of times in a row until
we actually got our assertion.
So let's go ahead and use flow control
to use a while loop and say while
we have a size greater than zero,
keep calling pop and just
make my problem happen.
You don't need to go inject
code into your program and rerun
it to make the problem happen.
You can just make it happen
in your expression parser.
This has some great,
you can do some great things with this.
If you just got done writing a
function and you want to test out the
boundary conditions of your function
by calling it with a high number,
a low number,
or a whole set of different parameters,
you can actually set
breakpoints inside of your code,
use the unwind on error option and set
it to zero and stop at your breakpoints
and explore while you're evaluating
your expression without actually
injecting the code into your program.
Now, we've got a compiler, right?
So we can actually define local types.
Now,
there's a lot of great implications here.
Some people use, you know,
the expression parser like
a compiler scratchpad.
What would happen if I typed this in,
and if I made a zero-sized array,
how big would that thing be?
Well, we've got the compiler
answering the question,
not just a, you know,
kind of a handmade expression
parser that might not get the
same result as a compiler.
So you can actually really
trust the results that come
back from these kind of things.
Also, if you have an opaque data type and
you're debugging your shared library at,
say, a client's office,
and you know that this first argument
to something is actually a simple type
that you can recreate really quickly,
you can go into your expression,
recreate your type,
cast one of the current void
star arguments into a type,
and actually use it in place.
So...
One of the other great things that
we can do with this expression,
because we can have multiple
lines in our expressions,
or multiple statements,
is we want to be able to probably
type more than one line when
we're entering expressions.
Here, if you type the expression command,
but you don't specify an expression,
you can actually enter
multiple line expression mode,
where you type as many
things as you want to.
Here, we'll declare a couple
of local variables.
We'll use a while loop to
iterate through the arguments
that were passed to our program.
We'll print something out,
and the last statement in our
expression will be the return
value of our expression.
Here, I want to see how many
arguments there were,
and I hit enter,
and we see that we actually
run the code in there,
and we get the result back.
So, again,
this is a great place to kind of go
in and possibly call your new function
that you've just gotten done creating
with your different boundary conditions,
and actually just using more
than one statement in your
expressions in the debugger.
One of the other differences that we
have in when evaluating expressions
is the way that we evaluate them.
With GDB, it would take an expression,
it would chop it up with its expression
parser and create a tree that
would get evaluated every time you
wanted to evaluate this expression.
It would go grab the value
of 2.2 and the value of Y,
and in GDB itself,
it would add the two things together,
and then it would craft up
a function call and actually
call the function itself.
With LLDB,
we took a different tact because
we have the compiler built in.
We actually use Clang to compile the
expression into an internalized format.
We run it through a code gen phase,
which actually creates
code and data for us.
We take your entire expression,
all of your statements and everything,
and we download it into
your program and we run it.
This means that you will get a
very accurate representation of
how that expression would have ran,
not this evaluating a tree
and doing each item wrong.
It also helps ensure that whatever you're
evaluating is evaluated on the bare metal
that you actually wanted to evaluate on,
not incorrectly possibly adding two
floating point numbers on the desktop
system when it doesn't match the
current settings in the debugger itself.
The other thing that we can
do is we can actually inject
checks into your expression to
make them safer to evaluate.
If we take a look at
this expression here,
we're going to be asked to
evaluate this expression.
Now, the first item, the item here,
might not be valid.
It might be uninitialized.
It could be garbage.
It could be something else that's
been trounced in your debug session.
So if we compile up this
expression with Clang,
we get an internalized compiler format.
We can actually run a set of
checks over this expression.
And we notice, hey,
we're dereferencing a pointer here.
Why don't we go ahead and insert a
call that will check this pointer?
And when it checks the pointer,
it'll try and read one byte of
data from where the pointer lives.
And if that fails,
it'll throw an exception and
stop before any other bad
things happen to your program.
Likewise,
we have an Objective-C object here.
This object could have been on the stack.
It could be uninitialized.
It could contain the previous remnants
of a previous object that might be
somewhat close but not really close.
So we can actually call.
It actually changes into a call that
checks the object much more thoroughly
and actually asks the runtime to
verify that this object is good prior
to calling it in your expression.
So then we end up with a much
safer expression that we can
evaluate in your program.
So that was the in-depth tour into LLDB.
Now let's take a look at a
few examples of how we can use
LLDB in non-debugging scenario.
And the best thing I can come up with is
how can I do symbolication using LLDB,
and why would I want to?
So first off,
we're going to manually symbolicate stuff
so you guys know how to do it yourselves,
and then we'll actually use a
module that's built into the
current Xcode 4.5c that you guys
have received at the conference
to actually do it automagically.
So the first thing we need when
we're actually going to symbolicate
something is a crash log.
Now, you take this crash log,
you open up LLDB, you grab the executable
from your crash log,
and you specify it as the target,
you locate it somehow.
And then if you want to load
any other shared libraries,
you can use the target modules
add to go locate all the correct
copies of your shared libraries and
add them into your debug session.
And after that,
here we actually load up DLD as well,
just for fun.
And after that,
we need to take a look at the
addresses where these actual
shared libraries were loaded when
your program actually crashed.
And what these addresses are is
they're actually the address of your
text segment inside of your program.
Now, you can take these addresses
and use the target modules load,
specify each of the files,
and tell us where the text segment lives.
Now, once you've done this,
you have a debug session that is idly
sitting there with the shared libraries
loaded at the exact same locations as the
stack frames that we have in the program.
So, if we take a look up at the top here,
we might want to take a look at
what this address means here.
And if we notice,
if we look up right next to the address,
we can see that it told us that it
happily crashed in car_trades.h.
That doesn't really help us figure out
where it actually crashed in our code.
That just tells it it crashed
in some inline header file.
So, if we use the target modules
lookup command that we learned
about at the beginning,
we can look up the
address and get a result.
And note that we got three stacks
of shared libraries loaded.
So, we can actually get the stack
frames back for one single address.
We will unwind your inline stack
frames all the way back to where it
actually crashed inside of your code.
And here we can see that we actually
crashed in main.cpp on line 11.
Now, there's an automated way to do this.
We've got a built-in module in
the Xcode 4.5 seed only that
is called ldb.macosx.crashlog.
And it kind of uses a lot of the
things that we talked about today.
When we import this,
we can see that it installs a new command
line command using the command script
add command that we learned about before.
We now have a new command at our
disposal that is called crashlog.
We can type crashlog and
specify a crashlog itself.
And it'll actually symbolicate
everything for us by looking
for all the different things,
disassembling around the crash site
because we've got access to the
disassembler and we can use these
objects inside of the debugger API.
And if we take a look at the
end of the stack trace here,
we can see that we have
actually reconstructed all
of our inline stack frames.
So we've got a lot of great modules,
and you might want to customize
this for your workflow when you
guys get crash logs from either
Apple or from another service.
Inside of the Xcode application,
you find the LLDB.framework.
Inside the LLDB.framework,
we actually have the
Python package that is LLDB.
Inside here,
we've got some great examples for you
for the exact formatters that we use to
format the standard template library.
So if you have some templatized classes
and you want to be able to view your
data types just like you're seeing your
standard template library data types,
take a look at these examples,
see what you can glean from them,
and modify them for your own projects.
Likewise,
all of the Objective-C types have ways to
view their data inside of them as well,
often without running code.
Some great examples to look at are
contained inside of multiple different
files inside of this directory.
Likewise, we've got the symbolication,
which is generic symbolication.
We've got the crash log module,
which will actually take
a crash log on MacOSX,
parse it up into Python objects,
and actually load your program up at
exactly the right address that it needs
to and do a lot of different things.
A great example to take in case
you need to modify it to fit
how you locate your crashed,
you know, how you desymbolicate your
crash logs once you get them.
And we also have a couple of
other examples that put together
things in a lot more complex ways.
So, again,
I encourage you to take a look inside
the LLDB module and look for anything
that ends in .py and see what you can do.
So that brings us to the end of the talk.
We think we've got a great product
for you guys in the Xcode 4.5 seed.
We've got some great customization
that you can do for all your
types and your formatting.
We have a great story for
multi-threaded debugging where we
know what every thread is up to.
We know why each thread stopped.
We've got compiler integration that
really should make you rethink what
you can do with your expressions.
And LLDB is a framework,
which means that it's available,
you know, for you to use as an API,
and it's also available through
the Python scripting interface,
both inside and outside of LLDB.
So we've got some web URLs here in case
anyone wants to go check out the website.
Really going to ldb.lvm.org will help
you get a lot more information and go a
lot more in-depth in a lot of the things
that we weren't able to dive into today.
Thank you.